# Signals

In web development the general way to manipulate what the HTML page displays is done by modifying the [DOM](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document_Object_Model) (Document Object Model). In traditional web development you'd use Javascript to modify the DOM yourself, but with Angular you write HTML templates that then display the data defined by the different properties of the component. When you modify the data in one of these properties, Angular uses a mechanism called **change detection** to detect and modify the DOM for you automatically.

In older versions of Angular it was the norm to use standard Javascript objects and built-in data structures to store and then display the data. The problem was that Angular had no way of knowing which component was modified and ran a change detection cycle on the entire component tree when event, async callback etc. was fired. When apps scaled up in size this resulted in performance issues and the need for developers to implement manual optimizations.

With the release of Angular 16 in 2023 a new approach to state handling is recommended: **signals**. Signals remove the need for the brute-force approach of change detecting the whole component tree and instead promote a more effective and granular way to handle states.

## Signal basics

Angular signal's wrap a value. You can get the wrapped value by reading the signal. You can also set a new value to be wrapped. Any value can be wrapped, so signals can contain anything from Javascript primitives (even the nulls and the undefineds) to self-defined types.

When you update a signal Angular knows what template depends on that signal and instead of having to do a full change detection cycle only updates the DOM-elements that are generated by that template.

Here's a simple example:

_app.ts_

```
import { Component, signal, WritableSignal } from '@angular/core';

@Component({
  selector: 'mp-root',
  imports: [],
  template: `<div>
    <h1>Hello {{ name() }}, age {{ count() }}.</h1>
  </div>`,
  styleUrl: './app.css',
})
export class App {
  count = signal(53);
  name: WritableSignal<string> = signal('Ronjson');
  unknown = signal<string | undefined>(undefined);
}

```

We of course have to import `signal` from `@angular/core` to use it. We're also importing `WritableSignal` but generally it's not required, it's only imported here for demonstration purposes.

The three instances defined here all produce the same outcome, differences are merely in the syntax.

With `count` we're letting Typescript infer the type from the entered value, in this case the produced type is `WritableSignal<number>.`

In `name` we're explicitly defining the type of the signal to `WritableSignal<string>`. Without this the `WritableSignal` import is not necessary.

And finally with `unknown` we're using implicit definition of the **union type** `string | undefined`.

The second way of defining a signal is rarely used, but it's good to understand that regardless of the approach you use, the type is always inferred to `WritableSignal`.

Notice also, that signals are **both functions and objects**. When used in your template you need include the parentheses, ie. `name()` to call the function and return the wrapped value. If you forget the parentheses the object will printed instead. In this case you would get:

**Hello [Signal: Ronjson], age [Signal: 53].**

To change the value of a signal you have to call the signal's `set()` method.

```
import { Component, signal, WritableSignal } from '@angular/core';
import { Gum } from './gum';

@Component({
  selector: 'mp-root',
  imports: [],
  template: `<div>
    <div>Hello {{ name() }}, age {{ count() }}.</div>
    <div>Hello {{ unknown()?.name }}, age {{ unknown()?.age }}</div>
  </div>`,
  styleUrl: './app.css',
})
export class App {
  count = signal(53);
  name: WritableSignal<string> = signal('Ronjson');
  unknown = signal<Gum | undefined>(undefined);

  constructor() {
    this.unknown.set({ name: 'Bobby Sax', age: 45 });
  }
}


```

You can also use the `update()` method if you want to create a new value from an existing one:

`this.unknown.update((bobby) => ({ ...bobby, age: 46 }));`

But this is simply syntatic sugar and the same outcome could be accomplished with:

`this.unknown.set({ ...this.unknown(), age: 46 });`.

Note, that you should never try and mutate signal values directly! The following examples are what's in the pro dev circles called a bad idea!

```

// Don't do it!
unknown().age = 50

// Nor this!
const bobby = unknown()
bobby.age = 50
unknown.set(bobby)

```

Why? Because Angular has no clue you've changed the value. It will not trigger change detection. It will lead to bugs.

Treat the values wrapped in signals as immutable and always replace the old value with a new one.

## Summary

- Signals are great for simple reactive states that are synchronous.

- They provide fine-grained reactivity by only updating the parts of the DOM that depend on the changed signals.

- Signals are both functions and objects. You read their values by calling them as functions.

- You should never mutate the values wrapped in signals directly. Always replace them with new values.
